At this point, we've learned
how to use asynchrony to overlap
CPU and GPU tasks, leading
to a big performance boost.
Our code now copies data from
the GPU to the CPU, launches an
asynchronous computation with CUB,
and then writes results to disk.
However, there's still
room for improvement.
The GPU compute doesn't
actually have to wait for
the copy to finish.
We can apply the same overlapping
strategy to the copy and compute
steps, but this will require
the copy to be asynchronous.
Fortunately, Thrust itself
doesn't have any special mechanism
to transfer data.
Under the hood, it relies
on the CUDA runtime function
called CUDA mem copy async.
This function can copy data
between host and device memory
without blocking.
Let's take a closer look at
how we can use it to overlap
our copy and compute steps.
Let's begin with the CUDA mem
copy async interface, which
essentially powers ThrustCopy.
It handles asynchronous data
transfers between host and
device memory, but there are a few
important pitfalls to keep in mind.
First, CUDA mem copy
async isn't type-safe.
It won't verify that the source
and destination types match.
Second, it operates in bytes
rather than elements, so you
need to multiply the number
of elements by the size of
each element to avoid mistakes.
Third, you must explicitly
indicate whether to transfer
it host to host, device to
host, device to device, using
the CUDA memcopy kind parameter.
Finally, CUDA memcopy async
returns an error code, which
you should always check.
Would simply swapping thrust copy
for CUDA memcopy async be enough
to overlap compute with copy?
Not really.
By default, all GPU operations
are ordered on the GPU end.
Even though CUDA memcopy async is
non-blocking on the CPU side, the
GPU still executes it in order with
everything else, just like those
earlier asynchronous compute steps.
This means that GPU will wait for
copy to finish before proceeding
to the next compute step.
This ordering of operations on the
GPU side is called a CUDA stream.
When you don't specify a CUDA
stream, some default one is
NVIDIA was first used.
And the great news is that
we can have as many CUDA
streams as we need.
When operations run in different
streams, they are no longer
ordered with respect to each
other and can execute concurrently.
That's exactly what we want.
If we send an asynchronous
copy to one stream and our
compute work to another, then
those two operations can overlap.
Let's see how that
works in practice.
CUDA stream T is simply a
type, just like an integer.
That means we can declare
our streams the same way we
declare any other variable in C++.
In this example, we define two
streams, one for memory transfers
and another for computations.
However, just creating a stream
variable isn't enough.
We also need to explicitly
call CUDA string create
to initialize it.
Later, if we want to wait
for the task in a specific
stream to finish, we can use
CUDA Stream Synchronize, which
blocks only until the particular
stream's operations are complete.
This is preferable to CUDA
Device Synchronize, which
causes CPU to wait until all
GPU operations have completed.
By synchronizing at the stream
level, we let other streams
continue to work In parallel,
Finally, once we're done with
a stream, we should call CUDA
stream destroy to release
associated resources.
You'll find CUDA stream T in almost
every accelerated CUDA library.
For instance, both CUDA mem
copies async and CUB device
transform have a CUDA stream
T parameter, though we haven't
had to specify it yet because
it defaults to zero, which Which
means use the default CUDA stream.
The reason CUDA Streams is so
widespread is that developers
often want to overlap these
library calls with other tasks.
For example, you might run
device-side computations in
one stream while simultaneously
handling host-side, IO and
memory transfers in another.
So let's start by creating
CUDA Streams for compute
and copy operations.
After setting up a
separate copy stream,
We can pass it as the last
argument to CUDA mem copy
async, so that the data transfer
runs in its own stream.
Next, we can specify compute
streams as the last parameter
when calling CUB device transform.
By doing so, we ensure the
computation runs in a different
stream than the copy stream.
Because the copy happens
asynchronously, we have to
make sure it has actually finished
before reading the host data.
To do this, we call CUDA stream
synchronize on the copy stream,
which blocks until operations
in the copy stream are complete.
After we're done writing the
results to disk, we synchronize
with the compute stream to
confirm that the GPU computations
have also finished.
In the end, our approach looks
like the diagram.
We perform two asynchronous
operations, one for copying
data, one for computing, in
separate streams.
We also include two synchronization
points to ensure everything
finishes in the right order.
And Congratulations!
We've just introduced
our first data race.
Let's walk through the first
few iterations to see why.
We issue a copy from
dprev to the host.
The first compute iteration
reads from dprev and writes
into dnext, which is fine.
But the next iteration reads from
dnext and writes back to dprev.
Because these operations run in
different streams, the GPU can
interleave them in unexpected ways.
This means that while data
is still being copied from
deprev to the host, it might
get overwritten by the next compute
iteration in another stream.
If we want correct visualization
results, we'll have to fix this.
Like many computer science
problems, we can solve
this by adding another
layer of indirection.
We can allocate an extra device
buffer, copy data into it
synchronously, and then copy
from the staging buffer to the CPU.
Since no one else is writing
to the staging buffer, there's
no risk of a data race.
But doesn't that defeat
the purpose of overlapping
compute with transfers?
At the first
glance, it may seem so.
But if you take a closer look
at the bandwidth across your
entire system, this approach
makes a lot more sense.
Copying data within GPU memory
can hit speeds of around 1,000
gigabytes per second.
Moving data within CPU memory
is somewhat slower, on the
order of 100 gigabytes per second.
However, transfers between the
CPU and GPU often go through the
PCIe bus, which might provide as
little as 32 gigabytes per second.
That means that the real bottleneck
is cross-memory transfers.
between the CPU and GPU.
The device-to-device copy
is going to be so fast, it's
practically free compared to
the cost of sending data over PCIe.
So, it still makes sense to
overlap the slower device-to-host
copy with ongoing GPU computations.
That brings us to our exercise
for this section.
In the exercise, you'll replace
thrust copy with CUDA memcopy
async to make your device-to-host
transfer asynchronous.
You'll also place your compute
and copy operations on separate
streams and synchronize them
exactly as shown in the diagram.
Finally, once you're comfortable
with your changes, you can
profile the code in NVIDIA.
IT'S VERY IMPORTANT TO USE
INSIGHT SYSTEMS TO SEE IF
IT INSIGHT SYSTEMS TO SEE
IF IT BEHAVES AS EXPECTED.